Loom: Static Website Development / Design UI
Advised by Dr. James Heliotis

A desktop application designed to help make web development more accessible to beginning web developers, designers, and even non-technical persons, while also providing the tools to give experienced web developers the power they desire, using the languages they already know. It provides a "What You See Is What You Get" web page editor that can be used by non-technical authors, a code-free interface for styling web components geared toward designers, an optional code editor for custom scripting or styling and an extension API intended for developers. Features within the application are designed to mirror standard web technologies, such as CSS properties, to help facilitate the learning of these technologies by novice users. After designing one or more web pages within the application, users can export the pages to static files ready for serving on the web.

The application will be written primarily in TypeScript and use the Electron framework for the desktop application. The application will modify source objects of a custom format and will contain a build tool to compile these objects to HTML, CSS, Javascript, and other static files. The build tool will also be available as a standalone command-line tool, to allow for the build process to be executed independently of the desktop application. This makes deployment processes such as cloud builds to e.g. Netlify easy while keeping the uncompiled source files in source control.

The project will take inspiration from many existing applications. For example, the WYSIWYG content editor will draw inspiration from existing Content Management Systems such as Wix, WordPress, and others, and the design tools take inspiration from desktop web editors such as Blocs and Google Web Designer, as well as other design applications like Adobe Illustrator and Figma. However, this project aims to differ from existing applications in a few ways. Many of these applications are not free and are largely targeted at designers, without the extensibility or power that developers desire. Some, like Google Web Designer, are targeted at specific use cases -- e.g. ads. This project aims to differ from these and other existing software by supporting the power and extensibility that developers desire, while still integrating designer-friendly interfaces and WYSIWYG tools, to provide a tool for users of all experience levels to create static web sites. This project will be free to use and open-sourced.